.TH SPINCLASS-SWEATFILE 5 "" "spinclass" "Spinclass Reference"
.SH NAME
spinclass-sweatfile \- sweatfile configuration format
.SH DESCRIPTION
Spinclass sessions are configured via TOML files called
.IR sweatfiles .
These control git excludes, Claude Code permissions, direnv setup,
session entrypoints, lifecycle hooks, MCP server registration, and
custom start-* plugins.
.PP
Sweatfiles are loaded as a hierarchy that merges
.I global
.RI ( ~/.config/spinclass/sweatfile )
\(-> intermediate parent directories \(-> repository-level
.RI ( <repo>/sweatfile )
\(-> worktree-level
.RI ( <worktree>/sweatfile ).
Later definitions override earlier ones according to per-field merge
semantics described below.
.SH TABLES
.SS [claude]
Controls Claude Code session behaviour.
.TP
.B system-prompt
String or file path.
Passed to
.B claude \-\-system\-prompt
at session start.
If the value is a readable file path, its contents are used.
.TP
.B system-prompt-append
String or file path.
Written to
.I .spinclass/system_prompt_append.d/2\-user.md
and passed via
.BR claude\ \-\-append\-system\-prompt .
.TP
.B allow
Array of Claude Code permission rules (e.g.\&
.BR Read ", " Edit ", " "Bash(git *)" ", " "mcp__server__tool" ).
.B Merge:
nil = inherit, empty array = clear, non-empty = append.
.SS [git]
.TP
.B excludes
Array of patterns appended to
.IR .git/info/exclude .
.B Merge:
nil = inherit, empty = clear, non-empty = append.
.SS [direnv]
.TP
.B envrc
Array of direnv directive lines written to
.IR .envrc .
When nil, defaults to
.B source_up
(plus
.B use flake
if a
.I flake.nix
exists).
.B Merge:
nil = inherit, empty = clear, non-empty = replace.
.TP
.B dotenv
Table of key-value pairs written to
.IR .spinclass.env .
Values support
.B $VAR
expansion; the special variable
.B $WORKTREE
expands to the worktree path.
.B Merge:
map merge (child keys override parent keys).
.SS [hooks]
Lifecycle hooks executed as shell scripts.
.TP
.B create
Script run after worktree creation (before session attach).
.B Merge:
scalar override.
.TP
.B stop
Script run when the Claude Code session ends (via Stop hook).
.B Merge:
scalar override.
.TP
.B pre-merge
Shell script run by
.B sc merge
after the worktree branch has been rebased onto the default branch but
before the fast-forward merge into it.
The script is executed via
.B sh \-c
with the working directory set to the worktree path.
The environment variable
.B WORKTREE
is set to the absolute worktree path.
If the script exits non-zero, the merge is aborted and the worktree is
left in its rebased state so the user can fix the issue and retry.
Typical use: run tests or linters as a pre-merge gate.
.B Merge:
scalar override.
.TP
.B disallow-main-worktree
Boolean.
When true,
.B sc resume
refuses to attach to the main worktree.
.B Merge:
scalar override.
.TP
.B tool-use-log
Boolean.
When true, a PostToolUse hook logs tool invocations.
.B Merge:
scalar override.
.SS [session\-entry]
Controls what command is exec'd when attaching to a session.
.TP
.B start
Argv array for new sessions.
Defaults to
.BR $SHELL .
.TP
.B resume
Argv array for resumed sessions.
When nil, falls back to
.BR start .
.B Merge:
scalar override.
.SS [[start\-commands]]
Array of tables declaring custom
.BI sc\ start\- name
subcommands.
See
.BR spinclass\-start\-commands (7)
for the full schema and JSON protocols.
.B Merge:
dedup-by-name (later definition replaces earlier one in-place).
.SS allowed\-mcps
Top-level array of MCP server names to auto-approve in
.IR .claude/settings.local.json .
These servers must be registered externally (e.g.\& in the user's
.IR ~/.claude.json ).
.B Merge:
nil = inherit, empty = clear, non-empty = append.
.SS [[mcps]]
Array of tables declaring MCP servers to register in
.I .mcp.json
and auto-approve.
.TP
.B name
(required) Server name.
Used as the key in
.I .mcp.json
and in
.IR enabledMcpjsonServers .
.TP
.B command
Executable to run.
A name-only entry (empty command) acts as a removal sentinel,
removing an inherited server.
.TP
.B args
Argv passed to
.BR command .
.TP
.B env
Table of environment variables set on the server process.
.TP
.B auto-allow
Array of strings forming an argv vector
.RI ( "command arg1 arg2 \&..." ).
The first element is the executable; remaining elements are its arguments.
When present, spinclass execs this command at session start to
discover tool-level permissions.
See
.BR "AUTO-ALLOW PROTOCOL" .
.PP
.B Merge:
dedup-by-name (full entry replacement, same as
.BR [[start\-commands]] ).
Every entry with a non-empty
.B command
implicitly adds to the allow-list.
.SH AUTO-ALLOW PROTOCOL
The
.B auto-allow
field on a
.B [[mcps]]
entry declares a command that spinclass executes at session creation
time.
The field is a TOML array of strings forming an argv vector: the first
element is the executable, and any remaining elements are arguments
passed to it.
The command must print a single JSON object to stdout describing which
of its tools should be added to
.B permissions.allow
in
.IR .claude/settings.local.json .
.SS Execution Context
The auto-allow command runs after
.I .mcp.json
is written but before the session entrypoint is exec'd.
The working directory is the worktree root.
The command inherits the session's environment, including any variables
set via the
.B [env]
table in the sweatfile hierarchy.
The command is exec'd directly (not via a shell); wrap in
.B sh \-c
if shell features are needed.
.SS JSON Schema
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "tools": ["tool_name_1", "tool_name_2"]
}
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B tools
(required) Array of bare tool names.
Names must
.B not
include the
.B mcp__
prefix; spinclass constructs the fully-qualified form
.BI mcp__ name __ tool
using the server's
.B name
field.
.SS Error Handling
.IP \(bu 2
If the command exits non-zero, the error is reported to stderr and the
session is still created.
.IP \(bu 2
If stdout is not valid JSON or does not match the schema, a warning is
printed to stderr.
.IP \(bu 2
If any tool name contains the
.B mcp__
prefix, it is rejected.
.IP \(bu 2
If the response contains a
.B servers
field, it is rejected.
MCP servers cannot auto-allow other servers.
.SS Examples
.B Basic: MCP server with built-in auto-allow subcommand
.PP
The server itself exposes an
.B auto-allow
subcommand that lists its safe-to-auto-approve tools:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[[mcps]]
name = "moxy"
command = "moxy"
args = ["serve"]
auto-allow = ["moxy", "auto-allow"]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Running
.B moxy auto-allow
might produce:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "tools": [
    "lsp_execute-command",
    "grit_commit",
    "grit_diff",
    "rg_search"
  ]
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Spinclass constructs fully-qualified permission rules and adds them to
.BR permissions.allow :
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
mcp__moxy__lsp_execute-command
mcp__moxy__grit_commit
mcp__moxy__grit_diff
mcp__moxy__rg_search
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Shell wrapper: dynamic tool list from an external source
.PP
When the auto-allow logic requires shell features (pipes, subshells),
wrap the command in
.BR "sh \-c" :
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[[mcps]]
name = "db-tools"
command = "db-mcp"
args = ["serve"]
auto-allow = ["sh", "-c", "db-mcp list-tools --safe | jq '{tools: .}'"]
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Minimal: allow all tools from a small server
.PP
For a server with few tools that are all safe to auto-approve, the
auto-allow command can return a static list:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[[mcps]]
name = "formatter"
command = "fmt-mcp"
args = ["serve"]
auto-allow = ["sh", "-c", "echo '{\"tools\": [\"format\", \"check\"]}'"]
.fi
.RE
.SH MERGE SEMANTICS
Each field uses one of these merge strategies when combining files in
the hierarchy:
.TP
.B "nil = inherit, empty = clear, non-empty = append"
Used by array fields:
.BR claude.allow ", " git.excludes ", " direnv.envrc ", " allowed-mcps .
A nil value (key absent) inherits the parent's value.
An explicitly empty array clears inherited values.
A non-empty array is appended to the parent's list.
.TP
.B "scalar override"
Used by single-value fields:
.BR hooks.create ", " hooks.stop ", " session-entry.start ", etc."
The child's value replaces the parent's entirely.
.TP
.B "dedup-by-name"
Used by array-of-tables:
.BR [[start-commands]] ", " [[mcps]] .
Entries are matched by
.BR name ;
a later entry replaces the entire earlier entry in-place (not a
field-level merge).
New names are appended.
.TP
.B "map merge"
Used by
.BR direnv.dotenv " and " mcps.env .
Child keys override parent keys; parent keys not present in the child
are preserved.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/spinclass/sweatfile
Global sweatfile (lowest precedence).
.TP
.I <parent-dir>/sweatfile
Intermediate parent directory sweatfiles.
.TP
.I <repo>/sweatfile
Repository-level sweatfile.
.TP
.I <worktree>/sweatfile
Worktree-level sweatfile (highest precedence).
.TP
.I .claude/settings.local.json
Generated by spinclass from sweatfile config.
Contains
.BR permissions.allow ", " enabledMcpjsonServers ", and " hooks .
.TP
.I .mcp.json
Generated by spinclass.
Contains MCP server registrations from
.B [[mcps]]
entries.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR spinclass (1),
.BR spinclass\-start\-commands (7),
.BR spinclass\-validate (1)
