.TH SPINCLASS-START-COMMANDS 7 "" "spinclass" "Spinclass Reference"
.SH NAME
spinclass-start-commands \- authoring guide for custom start-* plugins
.SH DESCRIPTION
Spinclass supports config-driven
.B start-*
subcommands declared via
.B [[start-commands]]
entries in the sweatfile hierarchy.
Each entry registers a
.BI sc\ start- name
subcommand that validates a positional argument, offers tab completion,
and creates a worktree session with a system prompt fragment.
.PP
This page documents the sweatfile schema, the JSON protocols for
.B exec-start
and
.BR exec-completions ,
and the runtime behaviour so that agents and users can author new
plugins without reading Go source.
.SH SWEATFILE SCHEMA
Each plugin is declared as a TOML array-of-tables entry:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[[start-commands]]
name             = "jira"
description      = "Start session for a JIRA ticket"
arg-name         = "ticket"
arg-help         = "JIRA ticket ID"
arg-regex        = "^[A-Z]+\-[0-9]+$"
exec-completions = ["sh", "\-c", "jira list \-\-json | jq '[.[] | {arg: .key, description: .summary}]'"]
exec-start       = ["sh", "\-c", "jira show {arg} \-\-json | jq '{context: .body}'"]
.fi
.RE
.SS Fields
.TP
.B name
(required) Lowercase identifier matching
.IR ^[a\-z][a\-z0\-9_\-]*$ .
Registers the subcommand as
.BI sc\ start- name .
Duplicate names within a single file are rejected by
.BR "sc validate" .
.TP
.B description
Short description shown in
.B \-\-help
and manpages.
Defaults to \(lqStart a session via the
.I name
plugin\(rq.
.TP
.B arg-name
Name of the positional parameter (e.g. \(lqticket\(rq, \(lqissue\(rq).
Defaults to \(lqarg\(rq.
.TP
.B arg-help
One-line help text for the positional parameter.
.TP
.B arg-regex
Optional RE2 regular expression.
The positional argument is validated against this before
.B exec-start
runs.
.B sc validate
warns when
.B exec-start
uses a shell interpreter (sh, bash, zsh, fish, dash, ksh) and
.B arg-regex
is not set.
.TP
.B exec-completions
Argv array exec'd at tab-completion time.
Stdout must be JSON; see
.BR "EXEC-COMPLETIONS PROTOCOL" .
Failures are silent.
May be omitted if no completions are needed.
.TP
.B exec-start
(required) Argv array exec'd when the command runs.
Every element undergoes literal
.B {arg}
substitution with the positional value.
Stdout must be JSON; see
.BR "EXEC-START PROTOCOL" .
The command is exec'd directly (no shell); wrap in
.B sh \-c
for shell features like pipes and redirects.
.SH EXEC-START PROTOCOL
.B exec-start
must produce a single JSON object on stdout:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "branch":      "<optional string>",
  "description": "<optional string>",
  "context":     "<required string>"
}
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B context
(required) Written verbatim to
.IR .spinclass/system_prompt_append.d/3-start- name .md
as the session's system prompt fragment.
This is the primary output \(em it provides context to the AI agent
about what the session is working on.
.TP
.B description
Used as the session description if the user did not pass
.BR \-\-description .
Falls back to
.RI \(lq name ": " arg \(rq.
.TP
.B branch
When present, checks out an existing local or remote branch instead of
creating a new one.
The branch must already exist; if it exists only on
.BR origin ,
it is fetched automatically.
This mirrors the behaviour of
.BR "sc start\-gh_pr" .
When absent, a new branch is created with an auto-generated name
derived from the description.
.PP
Invalid JSON causes the command to fail with a diagnostic.
An empty
.B context
value (after trimming whitespace) skips fragment creation.
.SH EXEC-COMPLETIONS PROTOCOL
.B exec-completions
must produce a JSON array on stdout:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[
  {"arg": "FOO-1", "description": "First ticket"},
  {"arg": "FOO-2", "description": "Second ticket"}
]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Each object has:
.TP
.B arg
The completion value inserted at the command line.
.TP
.B description
Human-readable description shown alongside the completion.
.PP
An empty array or invalid JSON silently produces no completions.
.SH MERGE BEHAVIOUR
Entries merge across the sweatfile hierarchy
(global \(-> intermediate parent dirs \(-> repo-level).
Later definitions override earlier ones by
.BR name ,
preserving the position of the first occurrence.
.PP
The built-in
.B gh_issue
entry ships via
.B sweatfile.GetDefault()
and can be overridden by declaring a
.B name = "gh_issue"
entry in any user sweatfile.
Built-in subcommands (e.g.\&
.B start
or
.BR start-gh_pr )
always win over a sweatfile entry with the same name.
.SH VALIDATION
.B sc validate
checks each
.B [[start-commands]]
entry for:
.IP \(bu 2
Missing or invalid
.BR name .
.IP \(bu 2
Missing
.BR exec-start .
.IP \(bu 2
Duplicate names within a single file.
.IP \(bu 2
Non-compiling
.BR arg-regex .
.IP \(bu 2
Shell interpreter in
.B exec-start[0]
without
.B arg-regex
(warning).
.SH EXAMPLES
A minimal plugin that adds ticket context from a hypothetical CLI:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[[start-commands]]
name       = "ticket"
arg-name   = "id"
arg-regex  = "^[0-9]+$"
exec-start = ["sh", "\-c", "ticket show {arg} \-\-json | jq '{context: .body}'"]
.fi
.RE
.PP
A plugin that checks out a feature branch and provides context:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[[start-commands]]
name             = "feature"
arg-name         = "branch"
exec-completions = ["sh", "\-c", "git branch \-\-format '%(refname:short)' | jq \-Rs '[split(\"\\n\") | .[] | select(. != \"\") | {arg: ., description: \"\"}]'"]
exec-start       = ["sh", "\-c", "echo '{\"branch\": \"{arg}\", \"context\": \"# Working on branch {arg}\"}'"]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Override the built-in gh_issue with a custom implementation:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[[start-commands]]
name             = "gh_issue"
arg-regex        = "^[0-9]+$"
exec-completions = ["sh", "\-c", "gh issue list \-\-json number,title \-\-limit 20 | jq '[.[] | {arg: (.number | tostring), description: .title}]'"]
exec-start       = ["sh", "\-c", "gh issue view {arg} \-\-json number,title,body | jq '{context: (\"# Issue \" + (.number|tostring) + \": \" + .title + \"\\n\\n\" + .body)}'"]
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/spinclass/sweatfile
Global sweatfile (lowest precedence).
.TP
.I <repo>/sweatfile
Repository-level sweatfile (highest precedence).
.TP
.IR .spinclass/system_prompt_append.d/3-start- name .md
System prompt fragment written by the plugin.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR spinclass (1),
.BR spinclass\-sweatfile (5),
.BR spinclass-start (1),
.BR spinclass-start\-gh_pr (1),
.BR spinclass-validate (1)
